
.. _downloads:

Downloading ECCO Version 4
**************************

This section provides directions to download the ECCO v4 r2 output 
(:numref:`download-solution`), the underlying model setup 
(:numref:`download-setup`) that can be used to re-run ECCO v4 r2 
(:numref:`eccov4-baseline`), `Matlab` tools to analyze ECCO v4 r2 and
other model output (:numref:`download-analysis`), and a list of
additional resources (:numref:`other-resources`).

.. _download-solution:

The Release 2 Solution
----------------------

The ECCO v4 r2 state estimate output is permanently archived within the `Harvard Dataverse <https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/ECCOv4r2>`__ that provides citable identifiers for the various datasets as reported in this `README.pdf <https://dataverse.harvard.edu/api/access/datafile/2863409>`__. For download purposes, the ECCO v4 r2 output is also made available via this `ftp
server <ftp://mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/>`__ by the `ECCO Consortium <http://ecco-group.org>`__. The various directory contents are summarized in this `README <http://mit.ecco-group.org/opendap/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/README>`__ and specific details are provided in each subdirectory’s README. Under Linux or macOS for instance, a simple download method consists in using ``wget`` at the command line by typing

::

    wget --recursive ftp://mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/nctiles_grid
    wget --recursive ftp://mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/nctiles_climatology
    wget --recursive ftp://mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/nctiles_monthly

and similarly for the other directories. The ``nctiles_`` directory prefix indicates that contents are provided on the native LLC90 grid in the nctiles format :cite:`for-eta:15` which can be read in `Matlab` using the `gcmfaces` toolbox (see :numref:`download-analysis`). Alternatively users can download interpolated fields, on a :math:`1/2\times1/2^\circ` grid in the netcdf format, from the ``interp_*`` directories. The ``input_*`` directories contain binary and netcdf input files that can be read by `MITgcm` (:numref:`download-setup` and :numref:`eccov4-baseline`). The ``profiles/`` directory (`see ftp server <ftp://mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/profiles/>`_) additionally contains the MITprof collections of collocated in situ and state estimate profiles in `netcdf` format :cite:`for-eta:15`.

.. _download-setup:

The Release 2 Setup
-------------------

To :ref:`baseline` the solution and :ref:`testreportecco` in :numref:`eccov4-baseline`, user wants to install the following components. First, install the `MITgcm` either by downloading a copy from `this github repository <https://github.com/MITgcm/MITgcm/>`__. Second, create a subdirectory called ``MITgcm/mysetups/`` and download the model setup there from `this github
repository <https://github.com/gaelforget/ECCO_v4_r2/>`__ by typing:

::

    git clone https://github.com/MITgcm/MITgcm
    mkdir MITgcm/mysetups
    mv ECCO_v4_r2 MITgcm/mysetups/.
    cd MITgcm/mysetups
    git clone https://github.com/gaelforget/ECCO_v4_r2    

Third, download the model input forcing fields (96G of 6-hourly fields in ECCO v4 r2), initial condition, grid, etc. input (610M), and observational input data (25G) either from the `Harvard Dataverse <https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataverse/ECCOv4r2inputs>`__ permanent archive or from the `ECCO ftp server <ftp://mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/>`__ as follows:

::

    cd MITgcm/mysetups/ECCO_v4_r2
    wget --recursive ftp://mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/input_forcing/
    wget --recursive ftp://mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/input_init/
    wget --recursive ftp://mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/input_ecco/
    mv mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/input_forcing forcing_baseline2
    mv mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/input_ecco inputs_baseline2
    mv mit.ecco-group.org/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/input_init inputs_baseline2/.

Downloaded directories should be organized as shown under :ref:`mitgcmdirs` for use in :numref:`eccov4-baseline`. Experienced users should feel free to re-organize directories assuming that they are comfortable with modifying the :numref:`eccov4-baseline` instructions accordingly.

.. _download-analysis:

Matlab Analysis Tools
---------------------

`Matlab` tools are provided to analyze model output one it has been downloaded (:numref:`download-solution`) or generated by user (:numref:`eccov4-baseline`) include the `gcmfaces <https://github.com/gaelforget/gcmfaces>`__ toolbox :cite:`for-eta:15`. It is typically installed by typing 
::

    git clone https://github.com/gaelforget/gcmfaces

and can be used, for example, to re-generate the ECCO v4 standard analysis (i.e., the plots included in :cite:`dspace-eccov4r2` for ECCO v4 r2) from the released model output (:numref:`download-solution`) or from the plain, binary, model output (:numref:`eccov4-baseline`). Documentation for `gcmfaces` is provided in the `github repository <https://github.com/gaelforget/gcmfaces>`__.


.. _other-resources:

Other Resources
---------------

-  The ECCO v4 r2 state estimate can also be downloaded and analyzed via the `NASA` `Sea Level Change Portal <https://sealevel.nasa.gov>`__ tools (interpolated fields) and the `Harvard Dataverse <https://dataverse.harvard.edu>`__ APIs (native grid input and output).

-  A series of three presentations offered in May 2016 during the `ECCO` meeting at `MIT` provide an overview of the ECCO v4 r2 data sets and applications are available via researchgate.net
   (`Overview <http://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.33361.12647>`__;
   `Processes <http://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.26650.24001>`__;
   `Tracers <http://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.36716.56967>`__).

-  `netcdf` enabled software such as `Panoply <http://www.giss.nasa.gov/tools/panoply/>`__ can be used to read the interpolated output (``interp_*`` directories) under `MS-Windows`, `Linux`, or `macOS`.

-  `xmitgcm <https://github.com/xgcm/xmitgcm>`__ provides a `python` alternative to using `Matlab` and `gcmfaces <https://github.com/gaelforget/gcmfaces>`__.

-  ``MITgcm/utils/`` provides basic `Matlab` and `python` functionalities.

-  The stand-alone `eccov4_lonlat.m <http://mit.ecco-group.org/opendap/ecco_for_las/version_4/release2/doc/eccov4_lonlat.m>`__ `Matlab` script can be used to extract the lat-lon sector (i.e., array) of the gridded output that spans the 69S to 56N latitude range.
